---
layout: post
title: On Go
tags: [CS]
categories: [English]
---

Beforehand I should clarify that I'm not an expert regarding the Go language. Actually I've barely written over 1000 lines of code in Go and am not aquainted with most of the standard library functions. However, I do have experience in a handful of programming languages and have a fair understanding of how they work. This blog is mainly about my thoughts on programming languages rather than Go, and Go is merely chosen as a starting point to extend my opinions on everything else.

## The Syntax

It is obvious where the designers of Go language got their ideas on how it should look like: the C language family. Yes, Go has made many small tweaks: throwing away the use of trailing semicolons after each statement, simplifying the ugly for statement and abandoning while, type annotation after the variable name... But still, it is the typical C family language and should look familiar to any programmer who has learned any mainstream language.

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {

    i := 1
    for i <= 3 {
        fmt.Println(i)
        i = i + 1
    }

    for j := 7; j <= 9; j++ {
        fmt.Println(j)
    }

    for {
        fmt.Println("loop")
        break
    }

    for n := 0; n <= 5; n++ {
        if n%2 == 0 {
            continue
        }
        fmt.Println(n)
    }
}
```
<center><small>A simple Go program</small></center>

I may sound sarcastic here, but I'm not. The familiarness is an advantage rather than a disadvantage. I believe it is not utterly impossible for Go designers to design such an language that looks alien to outside programmers, and yet have its own elegancy and fanciness. This is not done only because it would prevent Go's being accepted by the mainstream. Everyone is inherently lazy, and sometimes especially programmers. When we consider adopting a new language, we measure not only how many advantages it would bring to us compared to our current language of choice, but also how difficult it is for us to learn it, how long it takes for us to be actually productive with it. Time is an especially scarce resource. Good programmers, who are coincidentally a new language's target users, take extra care of their time.

That being said, the syntax of C has its own neatness and reflects how the CPU executes instructions. It's not necessary to be rebellious against it, unless you are exploring new forms of programmig languages or want to prove your self a really-smart-ass. (etc. Haskell)

## Type System

To everyone's relief, Go is a statically typed language, which means that the type of every variable is pre-determined at compile time and cannot be changed at runtime. This has a number of advantages: static types enable IDEs to provide better auto-completions, which many people can't live without. In regards to Go, it also provides a limited way of error-checking. Thanks to probably some genius Haskell designer, being statically typed doesn't mean that you have to declare type every time you have a variable. The type can be auto-inferenced based on the context (being passed as a function parameter, being assigned value whose type is determined beforehand, etc.). You can see the full power of type systems in Haskell, but that is another topic.

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "math"
)

type geometry interface {
    area() float64
    perim() float64
}

type rect struct {
    width, height float64
}
type circle struct {
    radius float64
}

func (r rect) area() float64 {
    return r.width * r.height
}
func (r rect) perim() float64 {
    return 2*r.width + 2*r.height
}

func (c circle) area() float64 {
    return math.Pi * c.radius * c.radius
}
func (c circle) perim() float64 {
    return 2 * math.Pi * c.radius
}

func measure(g geometry) {
    fmt.Println(g)
    fmt.Println(g.area())
    fmt.Println(g.perim())
}

func main() {
    r := rect{width: 3, height: 4}
    c := circle{radius: 5}

    measure(r)
    measure(c)
}
```
<center><small>Go interface example</small></center>

Thank to God, Go doesn't have object inheritance. Every time I browse through code that's written in OOP language, there's the endless parent-child cycle between classes that can cause me serious headache in a breeze. I'm inclined to say that programming itself is sinful with OOP being the forbidden fruit, but objectiveness have driven me from it. Go uses interfaces, which is like type classes in Haskell. It is function-driven while OOP is data-driven. I want to say that programs written in a function-driven approach tend to be more *flat* and less complex than OOP ones, but distant memories of SICP exercises have prevented me from saying that. Maybe it is more safe to say that writing complex function-driven code is harder than writing complex data-driven code, which makes people focus on solving problems instead of wielding fancy patterns. Programming is really just about getting things done nicely and cleanly. Many projects start with this in mind, but stick to it poorly afterwards.

Go has pointers, but not pointers that we're familiar with in C. Since Go has Garbage Collection mechanism, there's no need for manual memory management, and it wasn't clear at first to me why there would be a need for the existence pointers. Then I came to the pass by value/reference problem, and it somehow explained it. In Go, everything(primitive types, structs) is passed by value, unless it's pointers that are being passed (which are indeed also passed by value). So pointers are mainly used just as reference to variables, to avoid copying or just passing structs as they are.

Making everything pass by value has its elegance, and this is made possible because there's no object inheritence, making the work a lot simpler. However, there are also cases where passing by value doesn't look so good, when you are passing complex structures(`map`) or when you are passing something that copying doesn't make much sense(`chan`). Probably to make the matter simpler, Go has made these primitive types internally a pointer even without a pointer notation, which confused me a lot when I didn't figure it out. Also, other library structures(`sync.Map`) just specify that you should never pass "copies" of its instance but just use pointers. These things combined make Go a somewhat *impure* language, because there are many things that aren't elegantly solved and look unintuitive to an unprepared learner. Anyway, Go has suceeded in making itself a good-enough language, and purity isn't even its goal.

## Go Routines

Though given a fancy name, Go routines aren't as novel as they spell. More traditionally referred to as light-weight therads, it has been implemented in many third-party libaries and sometimes even included in some languages as default threading model(Haskell again). The idea is that OS threads are usually not as light as they can be, and when the number of threads reach a certain large number, it would put too much stress to the OS scheduler and could cause certain problems. So it's better for the program to manage the threads by itself and not relying on OS for the pseudo-parallelism.

Implementing something by yourself is not a new idea, and was the standard approach when programming was a brand undiscovered area and software development didn't become such a huge topic. OS threads are great and do their job *most* of the time, but they are just not as good when we want to create and destroy a *large* number of threads in a minute. Through the implementation of its own thread model, Go has successfully made multi-threading cheaper and gives us more reason to stay away from the ugly so-called *event-driven* code.

One thing that's unique about Go is that it has included multi-threading features like `go`, `chan`, `<-`, `select` into its language specifications. They are so important that they get their special syntax, while in other languages, the most they could argue for is merely a place in the standard library. Besides adding work on language implementation, Go's decision has made multi-thread code more readable and easier to write, which is something notable.

```go
package main
/* producer-consumer problem in Go */

import ("fmt")

var done = make(chan bool)
var msgs = make(chan int)

func produce () {
    for i := 0; i < 10; i++ {
        msgs <- i
    }
    done <- true
}

func consume () {
    for {
      msg := <-msgs
      fmt.Println(msg)
   }
}

func main () {
   go produce()
   go consume()
   <- done
}
```
<center><small>producer-consumer program in Go</small></center>

## More

Feel free to explore the language by yourself. It won't take much time if you're already an experienced programmer, since Go is a practcal language and borrows ideas from here and there. For me, it's always interesting to study new languages. They reflect on real-world software engineering challenges and solutions by some of the best brains in the area. Nevertheless, it's always fun to learn.
